---
title: 'Install old Java version for running PGDSpider on mac'
date: 2024-06-10
permalink: /posts/2024/06/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - bioinformatics

---

[PGDSpider](https://cmpg.unibe.ch/software/PGDSpider/) is a very popular data conversion tool to prepare files for various population genetic and phylogenetic programs. Using PGDSpider on mac, however, can be a pain if you don't have the correct Java version. Today I finally figured we can install an old Java version to run PGDSpider. My macbook is macOS 13.6, intel 2018. 

### Install old Java version on mac

**Step 1.** Download [PGDSpider](https://cmpg.unibe.ch/software/PGDSpider/). Double-click `PGDSpider2.jar` in the folder to see if it will run. If not, do step 2. 

**Step 2.** Open your terminal and check your Java versions on your mac:
```
/usr/libexec/java_home -V
``` 
This is the output of my Java:

<pre>
Matching Java Virtual Machines (3):
    20.0.2 (x86_64) "Oracle Corporation" - "Java SE 20.0.2" /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk-20.jdk/Contents/Home
    14.0.2 (x86_64) "Oracle Corporation" - "Java SE 14.0.2" /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk-14.0.2.jdk/Contents/Home
    1.8.333.02 (x86_64) "Oracle Corporation" - "Java" /Library/Internet Plug-Ins/JavaAppletPlugin.plugin/Contents/Home
/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk-20.jdk/Contents/Home
</pre>

You can see the default Java version 20.0.2 is higher than JAVA7 and JAVA8 on PGDSpider website. But I do have an old JAVA8 version and the path to use this version is printed behind it: `/Library/Internet Plug-Ins/JavaAppletPlugin.plugin/Contents/Home`. (Note a space in the middle of the path, use `\` to avoid issues)

You can test whether this old version makes PGDSpider using the following codes. 
```bash
/Library/Internet\ Plug-Ins/JavaAppletPlugin.plugin/Contents/Home/bin/java -Xmx1024m -Xms512m -jar /Applications/PGDSpider_2.1.1.5/PGDSpider2.jar
# Basically you copy and paste the path and add `/bin/java` after it. You need to modify the path to the folder you downloaded your `PGDSpider`. Mine is in folder `Applications`. 
```
If it runs, prefect! If not, you need a different version of Java. Follow step 3. 

**Step 3.** Download an older version of JAVA. Here are the [command](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24342886/how-to-install-java-8-on-mac) to download JAVA 8.

```bash
brew tap adoptopenjdk/openjdk
brew install --cask adoptopenjdk8
```
After installing Java 8, check the path: 
```bash
/usr/libexec/java_home -V
```
Now the output is:

<pre>
Matching Java Virtual Machines (4):
    20.0.2 (x86_64) "Oracle Corporation" - "Java SE 20.0.2" /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk-20.jdk/Contents/Home
    14.0.2 (x86_64) "Oracle Corporation" - "Java SE 14.0.2" /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk-14.0.2.jdk/Contents/Home
    1.8.333.02 (x86_64) "Oracle Corporation" - "Java" /Library/Internet Plug-Ins/JavaAppletPlugin.plugin/Contents/Home
    1.8.0_292 (x86_64) "AdoptOpenJDK" - "AdoptOpenJDK 8" /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/adoptopenjdk-8.jdk/Contents/Home
/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/jdk-20.jdk/Contents/Home
</pre>

Now copy and paste the path to use the Java 8 version and run PGDSpider:
```bash
/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/adoptopenjdk-8.jdk/Contents/Home/bin/java -Xmx1024m -Xms512m -jar /Applications/PGDSpider_2.1.1.5/PGDSpider2.jar 
```
I hope this works for your as well!

### Alternative ways to convert vcf to structure

- R package [radiator](https://thierrygosselin.github.io/radiator/) function `genomic_converter`
- [plink 1.9 recode](https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink/1.9/data#recode). 
```bash
plink --vcf [vcf filename] --recode structure --out <base name>
```